---
layout: post
title: "(WIP) Retrospective: Serious Relationship Problems"
category: retrospective
---

This is a personal one for myself. Feel free to skip. More about relationships between people, rather than anything specific like platonic or romantic. I'm too inexperienced for those.

I think it's good to acknowlege, learn, and then move on from situations. It has always been in my nature to accept fact as it is. But I just thought that moving so quickly might not be a good idea, sometimes. It's really hard for me to dislike someone. Or to even dislike their personality. But I always try keeping my respect for them as fellow humans. By the time someone has a serious problem with me, it must have already been beyond salvation, because I always remain neutral and understanding as much as I can. Serious relationship problems only happen when both parties hold different perspectives and stand by it, all the while leading to conflict that both sides don't move out of. I do believe I'm easygoing enough, that I am always up for reconsideration. So if it's a serious problem, then it really is serious and beyond what I could do.

In their perspective, my relationship with them needs fixing. I would have to comply by what they believe I am lacking. But everyone is emotional to their own problems. And as such a neutral person like me will always be seen as "not caring enough". Either way, I move on from things and learn to take lessons from what I experienced. Lessons meaningful to me, not to them. Whatever problems that their relationship with me have, it is reduced to my own issue to reconcile with myself. There's no windows for both sides to discuss when it becomes serious, because it's already beyond everything we could do. There is nothing left to say except for each side to reconcile with themselves. We would end up estranged.

And I do wonder why. Because everything is a learning opportunities that I never really seek for what is rightly mine. No, it's more accurate to say that whatever they have to offer, it's already too late. Already moved on, already learned. Now that I have resolved it within myself, nothing they say could be of significant to me. Perhaps someone owes me an apology, well, it's fine if they don't. If they apologise, it means they acknowledge the problem, and hopefully will not repeat it to someone else. Or because of my philosophy that I am responsible for my own reactions, I took whatever is the problems into myself to learn and sort out my feelings. There's nothing left for them to claim fault for. They could never apologise in a meaningful way, because I'm fine with either.

In that way, I have only resolved my own feelings, and came to the conclusion. But I am clueless as to what emotional needs I have that needed to be fulfilled by others. It feels melancholic, because it's acceptance. Once accepted, it can't be undone. Apologies are just words to me. But I will always remember, and will never really mind it. I thought I could take it, as long as others aren't harmed the same way. 

Is it too cruel that my approaches do not allow for reconciliation? Or perhaps, it's an approach that forced others to reflect. Not because of my stubborness that I refuse to reconcile, but simply because they did not need to even make an effort. The main hurdle is done, and they are left to reconcile with themselves. To reflect, even if it causes guilt or not. Most likely not if it's a serious relationship problem. But if in the rare cases and they do, then it seems that everything become solved in a slightly painful way. Is it because there is no effort needed, that it never feel like any forms of compensation is never enough? If it was me, that would sting. 

And that really is how it works. People apologise to also reconcile with themselves, acknowledging their mistakes. But I have already accepted them before that, and that probably sting more. People wish to be responsible for their acts, but when I just move on so quickly, I took that responsibilities away. Maybe that's why. Taking it that way lessens my burden, since it will only be a matter of reflection.
