---
layout: post
title: "(WIP) Discussion: In the Name of Religion"
category: discussion
---

<!-- Word count: 1,347 words-->

Here's a more sensitive, touchy one. On the matter of religion and what we would be willing to do for it.

# A. In the Name of Religion's Righteousness
Religion taught us the ways of life that are judged to be good, with principles that would better humanity. And as such, we all strive to act on these principles and to behave accordingly. Naturally, religion is akin to righteousness itself. Then, it is also only natural that anything we do in the name of religion, we believe that we do so for the greater good. Reality couldn't be any further than that, because just how much have we messed up for what we have done in the name of religion? 

Some can become zealous, and those at the extreme end of the spectrum would be those that are considered religious extremists. We have seen violence happen because of them. The Crusade itself, while done in the name of religion to take back the Christian Holy Land, which at the time was also the Muslims' Holy Land, was essentially a war of conquest in simple terms, although I will not touch more on this subject given to my lack of comprehensive knowledge on the matter. At least, it is hard to say that the crusade was justified. Then, likewise, not everything that we do in the name of religion is also justified.

People seek to be right, and since religions contain the tenets of righteousness, naturally people hope to become righteous through their own faith. Indeed, it is very good work if done in a balanced manner. When we speak of God, we speak of faith, which is an extremely personal matter to us. In expressing our faith, we believe that we are the righteous, and in preaching to others, we hope to assert and prove that our stance is also a correct one. In a position of such precondition, even before we have ever said a word, I believe that it is therefore extremely difficult to identify our own biases and flaws. 

To speak of religion is to also speak from a (spiritually) higher pedestal than the one conversing with us. In fact, I think there is a slight moral obligation that incentivizes us to pay closer attention to anything that directly relates to religious doctrine, and because the precondition is that such doctrine is good, we are also more likely to believe in what was said to us unless we become even more critical in our thinking. And because we ourselves are aware of our supposed righteousness when speaking of God, we too must become even more cautious with our words, lest we spread misinformation.

#B. The Non-Negotiable Nature of Faith
Faith is non-negotiable, both in good and bad ways, I believe. It is non-negotiable for the faithful, in that it is the centre of their life. The theoretical doctrine of faith is non-negotiable as it directly relates to humanity's concept of morality, our moral guidepost. A family with God at its centre is a holy family. Not just a walk of life, but something you can't simply take up and then throw away. Generally speaking, faith guides people towards imitation of Christ in his goodness, and here I speak of the Catholic faith alone. Of course, we also have the more misguided ones.

And although the presence of faith should be non-negotiable in their life, I think faith can make someone non-negotiable. If someone believes they are doing something in the name of God and religion, it's rather hard to convince them otherwise, especially if they are a particularly strong-willed person. Sometimes what they do is right, and sometimes it's wrong. But if everything is placed under the umbrella of faith, then where is the line that distinguishes between right and wrong?

That is precisely why we say that faith can make people blind. Anything that requires a strong form of trust in something is bound to do that, especially if it is righteous in its purest nature. Even if what someone is doing is wrong, who can even negotiate with them since they are "doing it for God"? We all tend to bring people into our causes because we are trying to make things better, but it is especially harmful if our intention was wrong right from the beginning. As such, it is important to be critical of oneself.

# C. An Abstraction
For the sake of the conversation, one can think of religion simply as a set of beliefs, or ideology. A belief that is simply too strong may make a person more extreme. There really are not many differences in terms of acting on faith in an extreme manner versus absolute loyalty to a certain ideology. It is good to be pious, but not zealous. Even Nazism was an ideology on its own. Or Marxism–Leninism. Or perhaps the idea of democracy or totalitarianism, although here I am just listing examples I can think of. I imagine that even democracy that is actioned in an extremist way would still be particularly harmful.

Certainly, some ideologies of the past are simply unethical, and I do hope that what we have right now is far better. Extreme loyalty leads one to become critical not of oneself but of others, or, as I may say, it makes one follow the ideology a little too hard. Nazism is an extreme example of this, but even so, the way the Holocaust happened was pretty extreme itself. Extremism need not be applied to only religions or political ideologies. It could be applied to any set of personal beliefs or moral code. Everyone has their own take on what a certain concept means, such as how we all have an individual and personal definition of gratitude and happiness, for example. The way we enforce it with ourselves and others, and the way we can become critical of others if the beliefs are not upheld, can be rather dangerous.

For a particularly specific example, I may say that parents would teach their children the moral codes that they believe to be right. It only makes sense to do so to teach a child what is good and what is bad. However, certain takes on certain things can be rather toxic or out of place, especially if the holders of such beliefs are steadfast in their thinking. Something is wrong when one's logic is not completely satisfied with what they were taught. And some of us who were too young wouldn't understand completely why something that should be morally right was done in such a questionable manner, especially when we were the recipients of negative reactions when such supposedly ethical concepts were not executed right. Perhaps extreme ideas lead to the propagation of such ideas to others, and likewise the severity of the repercussions.

# D. Finale
Truth be told, I might have repeated myself a bit too often. This post is shorter since I haven't gotten much idea for it. That being said, I believe objectivity is always the key to remaining rational. It is always a balance to do what's right and to hold ourselves back from enforcing any form of idea too much that it becomes dangerous. That being said, religion does give a moral pedestal that could make someone's words non-negotiable in many ways. Of course, this also depends on the person, but at least I would say that there is a fine line to tread.
# D. Finale
Truth be told, I might have repeated myself a bit too often. This post is shorter since I haven't gotten much idea for it. That being said, I believe objectivity is always the key to remain rational. It is always a balance to do what's right and to hold ourselves back from enforcing any form of idea too much that it become dangerous. That being said, religion does give a morality pedestal that could make someone's words non-negotiable in many ways. Of course this also depend on the person, but at least I would say that there is a fine line to tread.
