---
layout: "post"
title: "(WIP) Restropective: Upbringing"
category: discussion
---

I really do think a person's formative year is highly important. I grew up being very good at entertaining myself. Perhaps I got used to it since I was left alone often. Still, it taught me that I could make myself happy, I could create things that make me happy. I was raised to be independent, and in that sense I also become emotionally independent from parents and family. That mindset works well for me too since my emotions are not too intense. I never missed my family, and perhaps that is also because of alexithymia. I do have feelings, just not intense and unidentifiable without putting on my thinking cap.

Even when I lived in a narcissistic environment after, my biggest concern was just how to please others, or else I would get hurt physically. At some points, I really believed the gaslighting, but I was never really trying to earn anybody's approval. I just didn't want to be harmed in any ways. Still, it puts me into depression and I really did think that I'm just as terrible. Guilt and shame was their weapons. But since I never had such emotional connections or desires with them, things never worked out. Indeed, if I was craving for approval, I would try changing myself. Yet I looked at it with a logical perspective that I simply didn't want to get hurt. And I just try to control every factors around them so that I won't get hurt.

But even so, those guilt and shame never soaked into my heart, because I could never envision their expectations. They were words that cannot be painted. What you can see decide what you can do, in my case. And many things about them are out of my controls. When I really stop trying to adhere to impossible standards, and just follow the vision I saw for myself, things just work. As if I snap out of the fog of depression. Snapping out using the realisation that everything I knew of was just gaslighting and claims about me made without concrete basis. It filled me with a sense of wonder. About how someone could think so differently and irrationally. The words from their mouths do not make sense in the vision I saw of heaven. Not quite a vision, but I can't imagine a heaven where such personality would exist. For it spread negativity, contempt, and hate. It is cloaked in discrimination and prejudice. Something about it doesn't give the same warm and fuzzy feelings that heaven would be. 

When I imagine of heaven, it makes me want to try at imitating God in the way he lived. The kindness and love, sunshine and warmth. But a world with people such as the ones I know would just be chaotic and stressed. There are no peace. Thankfully, my inherent passiveness and stoicism led them toward ignoring me for most of the times aside from work. It's good, because my relationships with them stopped becoming a recurring problem. Perhaps they have simply realised how different I am to them, and that the extreme measures they made me went through would just never work. We were never on the same spectrum. They thought I did not fear them. No, I simply could not understand what the points are. It was a constant Performance Improvement Plans on top of another Performance Improvement Plan. But there are no visions I could see of such plans. But I do have a good vision of heaven, the sort of perfection that I wanted to imitate. And such warmth filled me with excitement and joy. 

For the world they imagine of are run on guilt and shame, on saving face. In heaven there will be no need, for the Lord knows everything. Even if guilt and shame are emotions that can be used to deter us from bad behaviour, inherently negativity cannot breed positivity. And God, in His ministry on Earth he had never used such harsh words on others. Why? Because He knew His love is better than that, I'm sure. That there is path toward the same results, but using positive elements and emotions. Fear motivates people. But so does a faith and belief. Those are all positive. God does not guilt us or shame us, He made us humble ourselves, and he shows us faith and love, from which we can follows his steps. And by His gifts that were granted to each of us, we'll be able to bring heaven to Earth. Bringing all of its goodness and virtues to Earth through good work that glorify Him. Create a better world for others, a paradise. Such visions are so warm I could feel myself in it. And positive feelings simply make us want to share the same feelings with others. The joy of the good news causes us to spread it across the continents. In God I trust that we can be better and do better. 
