---
layout: post
title: "Discussion: The Myth of Sisyphus - On Philosophical Suicide"
category: Discussion
---
<!-- Word count: 4,553 -->

For those who are familiar with the concept of 'absurdism', mainly attributed to the French philosopher Albert Camus, one would be presented with "The absurdity of existence raises the question of suicide and the meaning of life" being the only serious philosophical problem, "judging whether life is or is not worth living amounts to answering the fundamental question of philosophy". In his work *The Myth of Sisyphus* ([Source][sisyphus]), Camus decried that a "leap of faith", that is, religion as a solution to the absurd, would be considered a "philosophical suicide". In this sense religion is represented as an end, or an inexplainable solution that leads a person to no longer revolt against the absurd, to find meaning despite the inherent meaninglessness of the universe. However here I propose that religion may be approached as a means or a process instead of an end to strive for. One does not simply seek faith simply to find the meaning of life, but perhaps as a navigational tool only.

I would recommend that the essay _The Myth of Sisyphus_ be read first to better understand this school of thought. On another hand, I would also like to note that I simply did not adopt the philosophy after reading about it, but simply found a label to my typical train of thought. Double quotations are used specifically in section A to denote actual passages or sentences from the essay, as it better describes the philosophy than I can.

Here is a free PDF of the first part of the essay (An Absurd Reasoning): https://www2.hawaii.edu/~freeman/courses/phil360/16.%20Myth%20of%20Sisyphus.pdf

# A. Absurdism, and the Notion of "Philosophical Suicide"
Generally speaking, humans seek happiness, and reason (understanding of the world around them). Albert Camus thus says "The absurd is born of the confrontation between the human need and the unreasonable silence of the world." ([Source][sisyphus]). Because "the world itself is not reasonable, and "what is absurd is the confrontation of this irrational and the wild longing for clarity whose call echoes in the human heart". At least for myself who have always sought to understand, this reality is even more prominent. It makes sense for individuals to have certain ideals or approaches that they uphold, so to speak, throughout their lives. Some seek to solve problems, whether it be within a certain expertise or interpersonal matters. To them, it would be useless to simply seek to "understand", as I do, without doing anything about it. I suppose I'm just slightly more curious than others.

Back to the point, absurdism targets mostly human's desire to understand and comprehend, to make the world rational and reasonable in their perspectives. And despite our struggles, the universe itself never provides any meaning to what we do. We all have those tendencies to understand to some extent. Even in the simplest way such as being wronged, our minds go back to the question of "Why?", and seek answers to the injustice laid out before them. I believe that such contradictions and absurds are always present in the world, in our every waking moment. They provide me with much amusement.

The absurd must always be contemplated, or more accurately, "the absurd has meaning only in so far as it is not agreed to". In Albert Camus' views, the only appropriate response to the absurd is to live on despite knowledge of it, even if "a man who has become conscious of the absurd is forever bound to it." That is, although the world provides no meaning, we continue living and searching for it. I will speak more on this later.

In the face of such irrationality, people who turn to faith as a solution to the absurd can be said to have committed "philosophical suicide". That by relying on God "even if he does not correspond to any of our rational categories", we would solve the question of the absurd, the meaning of life. And indeed, faith does provide such meanings, such as to glorify God, to be in union with Him in heaven, et cetera. However, at this point, one would no longer contemplate the absurd, and through acceptance and agreement of the absurd in such a way one might as well have committed suicide, a philosophical one at that. Instead of ending one's life because one becomes conscious of the absurd, one decides to no longer think about it, and the absurd loses its meaning. There are no differences in the acts. "To an absurd mind reason is useless and there is nothing beyond reason."

Furthermore, "the absurd, which is the metaphysical state of the conscious man, does not lead to God". At the same time, it brought into question the need, or perhaps the validity of religion, but not necessarily reject or contradict religion itself. Again, quoting the original essay, Albert Camus referred to Chestov who stated: 
> The only true solution is precisely where human judgement sees no solution. Otherwise, what need would we have of God? We turn toward God only to obtain the impossible. As for the possible, men suffice.

Now, as a Catholic, I do believe that there are people who even though are capable they still rely on God. And I'm certain some turn toward God **not** only to obtain the impossible. The main question that I have always wondered about is:
> Does man "invent" a God to explain the impossible, or is it God that created man?

Indeed, this question has a clear solution if it is to be answered from the perspective of religion. However, we must also notice that throughout history, various folk religions, mythologies, and folk stories explain the reasons behind natural phenomena, that teach the way of life, et cetera. A common factor is that the gods in these religions are always of a higher power, someone who can explain the irrationality of the world. Perhaps they might be the same entity, or they might not be. Although correlation does not always correspond to causation, it is clear that humanities have always looked up to their "gods", those of higher powers, for something they cannot obtain. This, I believe, has long since become the foundation of hope and faith.

Of course, it is blasphemous for me to say this. However, there will never be enough proof to prove God's existence, or even His origin if there ever is one. And again because "nothing can be proved, everything can be proved". We never know. God himself, as I see it, is among the most clear epitome of the inexplainable, the irrational, and the absurd. What is absurd is perhaps not God, but our lack of understanding that made everything seem absurd. To revolt against absurdism is to continuously attempt to rationalise it, so to give up that effort and put trust in an unreasonable being is akin to suicide. I have repeated the point at this stage.

In short, a philosophical suicide happens to a man who "solved" the absurd through faith in something even more absurd. That is absurd in itself, and again, "to an absurd mind, reason is useless and there is nothing beyond reason."

# B. Faith as a Mean Not (Yet) as an End
Of course many will argue that faith is both a means and an end, however, this is not a topic that I should place much discussion on. However, the proposition that using faith as a solution to the absurd is merely "philosophical suicide", while it is true, considers only faith as an end to find meaning. That is humanity's attempt to find meaning through faith, a higher power. Although I myself may not be clear on this, general responses include to return to heaven, to glorify God and his goodness, et cetera. Perhaps I am repeating myself here.

Strange enough, the main reason I follow the Catholic faith was because of the way of life that Jesus led, or at least, the principles that we love everyone around us. Well, love is in a lot of things, not just love categorised into familial love, romance, love between siblings, love-hate relationships, parental love, et cetera. I simply thought that if everyone did similar things, the world would be a much nicer place to be in, even though we may be imperfect.

There are obviously doctrines in terms of the creation tale described in the Book of Genesis, the Holy Trinity, and such, which may contradict the fundamental question of absurdism, that is suicide. Religion answers the question of the meaning of life. Meanwhile, the philosophy of absurdism boils down to the (paraphrased) question of "What should I decide today, to have a cup of coffee, or to commit suicide, if there is no inherent meaning to what we do?". However, note that absurdism may question religion or its purpose, and in its entirety does not lead to God himself, but in no way does it contradict the existence of God. Other than that I see no other fundamentals of religion that is as important as this.

Thus, we are now questioning the end purpose of life. St. Thomas Aquinas has logically shown that all existence leads us back to God, for He is our creator. We cannot conceptualise him, but we sure do understand that God is the root origin of our existence and life. Therefore, one may argue that the meaning of our lives is to love and serve God as we love and serve others. Although my line of thoughts fell into this area, it did not derive from understanding that it is our purpose, but from a logical conclusion that doing so is good, which, of course, was also based on some of my own experience.

Here we observe a distinctive difference. To love and be good to others because it is our purpose, or to do so simply because of its nature that is goodness. Likewise, we can live for an end meaning or purpose that is happiness (or whatever else that may be), or simply for the joy of pursuing it, for the sake of being. My approach is the latter, which, I myself consider to be rather, unfaithful. Indeed faith provides us with guidelines on the ways of life and how we may treat others. But I would say that although God has directed humanity to live by His commandments, in this life I at least had the freedom to choose it at the same time. There is no difference on the outside if God has me do it anyway, but it is always better that I choose to do it also in my heart and not simply because I was told to do so. There is a sense of freedom in this choice. And the pursuit of our path toward joy and happiness, out of our own choice, brings us much passion. 

I dare not say that I would attempt to disobey what is already so clear in front of me, but from my ways of speech, it certainly seems that I prioritise my own choice more than God's decision. It is thus necessary to clarify, that at times when I am aware that my thoughts are not in line with what is good, I do pray along the line of "my thought is contradicting, but I'll pray for this anyway since this is what is good (as God would have wanted)." But lots of the time, I felt happier knowing that I had a choice. Because after all, God gave us free will, or so I believed.

As Albert Camus proposed, paraphrased ([here][exurb1a]): the solution to the absurd, or the necessary responses, would be through passion, freedom, and revolt. I've mentioned the first two terms, and most importantly to revolt, is to do all of the above knowing that in this material world, there really isn't any meaning. In my personal perspective, since everything is transient and that one day, humanity will come to an end (the Church calls it Judgement Day), inherently nothing we do will last, except the impact that we leave in the here and now. Then, faith is the means which helps us navigate life and the absurdity of the universe, and its indifference toward us. In this way, I may have found a personal reconciliation between the absurd events that happen throughout my life, and my own faith.

For me, faith had never answered the question of the meaning of life in a satisfactory manner. Indeed, we are to glorify God. But other than that, His world is a separate world from this material universe. And this material universe has no purpose to it. One day, in a very distant future, everything will end. We are tiny compared to the cosmos, nothing we do would ever matter, and yet we still continue to live with a passion to make things better for others, we still pursue joy and happiness for the sake of being, for the intrinsic value of life than committing suicide. Happiness is a condition of life, or to me, contentment. I dare not say that I am happy, however knowing that there is no meaningful ending made me live in the present more. In a contradicting manner, the philosophy that shows no meaning to the world would make a person more passionate about the very same world they are living in. Possibly because freedom, the conscious awareness of the absurd allowed us to gain control of our fate. 

And although so many contradictory things happen around us, they still work together. What is absurd, is not the universe, but the fact that our mind cannot resolve the absurd or anything that is contradictory for that matter. But because we embrace the existence of absurdity, we pursue an understanding, a satisfactory solution of the absurd while also being aware that we will never get to the bottom of it. The absurd man, he himself is absurd. For humanity gains much motivation from seeing an end in sight than pursuing a never-ending, moving goalpost. Yet knowing that the more we learn, the less we realise we know, brought me much happiness and amusement in that I would always have something to entertain myself on. We will never finish the puzzle that is our universe and still pursue solving it anyway. There are many ways in which we can have fun in the absurd world once we embrace it after we have lamented about the question of "Why" it is that way.

People might say, "Life is unfair, just deal with it". It surely sounds demotivating, but I dare say, that there is a more positive take. Life is unfair, so just have fun and roll with it. Notice the little things and you might find entertainment in everything you see. At least I do know that since I was a kid, I have always been good at entertaining myself (maybe because I'm autistic). And possibly because I'm almost always curious about things that are unconventional. On that note, I think the fact that I'm religious while also believing in the absurd, is quite absurd itself.

An absurd man is just that. We live without hope for the meaning of the world. And for an absurd mind, there is no reason (which is quite contradictory in the logical manners in which we approach things).

# C. Beyond Hope, There Is Trust
It is exactly as how I wrote it: beyond hope, there is trust. Trust in what, that is the question. People spoke of the lack of hope as despair, but it is simply a trust that the worst will happen. Hope is a form of positive expectation that does not dictate the results but the process. That is, 'hope' considers a positive process, rather than 'expectations' which believes that a positive, tangible outcome will happen. This is why when we lack hope, we turn to what we place our trust in. I would say that a lack of hope does not necessarily imply despair, but simply trust.

That sort of trust could be irrational or rational. But more often than not, my experience has been an implicit trust that something positive will happen, simply because if we consider a fair pair of dice, then it is impossible to be on a losing streak continuously without winning even once. It is simply a probabilistic measure that lacks basis, however, I believe it made perfect sense simply because to be in despair for one's entire life is simply impossible, just as how we are never happy for the entirety of our life.

Perhaps in the minds of the absurdists, they trust that the world won't have any meaning provided to them. And this provides foundations for their trust in their own passion, freedom, and the quest of revolt against the absurd. To be happy, and make others happy. To love others, and be loved in return. All for the sake of being and our intrinsic value simply because we are humans, and that we exist. That is not to say that we would forget our past but to objectively reflect on it. As for what is the right way to feel about it, it is for each person to realise.

To be frank, hope is irrelevant in the minds of the absurdists, I believe. Hopes tend to be tied to goals. However, the nature of goals may not simply and necessarily be about achieving a particular outcome, but also about the process. One might have heard that even the journey is worthwhile, and that is exactly what it is. The goal could simply be to keep doing what we are doing now as a process. For example, to keep enjoying the little things in life or to continuously fall into despair. But despair is hardly a desirable goal. Goals colonise our presents, and I believe us absurdists placed emphasis on the process but not the outcome. And since there is no need for us to hope of achieving a particular outcome, hope is therefore irrelevant. However, as I like to say it, beyond hope, there is an implicit trust in something else.

# D. Then, Is There Meaning or Value in What We Do?
Inherently, I say not. The transient nature of the universe dictates that nothing will last forever in the physical world, meaning that at some point, the human race will all go extinct or disappear. Maybe soon, maybe later. However, it is clear that at that time, nothing that we have worked for will ever have any meaning. In fact, eventually, the remnants of human civilization would disappear too. Any sort of philosophy that denies its believers of an uncaring and unfair material universe (from humanity's standard) condemns its own followers to a philosophical dead end or so-called philosophical death. Accepting a fact of the universe does not imply succumbing to despair unless we really have been clinging to the denial of such facts that the world might as well fall apart because we could not accept anything that states otherwise.

Revolting against the absurd relies on first accepting it, realising that it's there, because if we can only be at peace by denying the ultimate meaninglessness of the universe on the last day, then we are not really living in this world at all. We would be clinging to a pretend world that has meaning, thereby emulating a sense of happiness grounded in a fragile reality, simply because we couldn't accept the other conclusion. It is a futile attempt, at best, because indeed, to face that void in the abyss means we would have to realise that everything that we believed to have a long-lasting value in the world is nothing but a projection of the mind (here I do not concern or implies the same on religions as it is a sensitive matter in which I have no knowledge of the divine realms).

Even right now, whatever we do hardly has any effect outside of ourselves. What we have done is extremely minimal within our observable universe. And even the immediate effect of our technologies barely affects any other planets within the Solar System. So, what meaning do we even have to the outer world? Nothing. Perhaps someone out there might be aware of us. But some simply carry on their lives never knowing about our existence, just as we are also ignorant of extraterrestrial beings. 

Within the Earth, our global community, we are also replaceable in what we do. The world never stops moving, and a single death does nothing to stop others from moving on. Half of the planet may perish and the other half will still continue to do their best and survive, and I believe they would never wallow too much in their grief to stay in the past. The definitive nature of "Death", I believe, is the root of our impermanent. The value of what we do would indeed be attributed to us, however even if we don't do it, someone else is bound to do something similar in the future, simply because the world doesn't depend on one person to move forward. We are all necessary pieces, and although losing one piece wouldn't hurt anything on a cosmic scale, we are still a part of the system. I might say that our dependencies on each other are rather decentralised.

Perhaps this is why I believe that we shouldn't be prideful. Since whatever we do has no long-lasting meaning anyway, we are just the same as others. Stripped of all meanings in what we do and come back to our intrinsic value, we are equal and thus there is no basis to be prideful about. That doesn't mean we shouldn't celebrate the little achievements on our way, as we should now all know of the clear distinction between being "proud of oneself" versus being "prideful". In the end, self-importance matters the least.

Now, one might question, that if someone else will do our job anyway, then why should we be the one doing it? I believe it is simply out of our own goodwill toward others, the desire to make others happy and to make ourselves happy. And the pursuit of meaning even in an indifferent universe. At some points, a person thought that since they can do it, why not? And that is the difference between nihilism and absurdism. If the nihilist asks the question of "Why?", then the absurdists would ask "Why not?", because although nihilism pointed out the question, absurdism proposed a solution in which we can face reality.

Although I mentioned that we are replacable to the universe, to each other I dare say that we are not. However this idea borders on the definition of existentialism, one where the goal is to create one's own meaning. Because our choices affect not only the world but the people around us. And I'm sure none of us would believe that anyone else could replace their own families. That clearly speaks of the immediate and irreplaceable value to the closest people around us. We became aware of each other's uniqueness, and although being unique does not make one necessarily important or useful, it still means that it cannot be replicated. Now, this is also a matter one should clearly distinguish the difference; as we may be replacable but cannot be replicated. The religious would say that God made us all unique. A tiny community such as ours matters not to the larger system that is the world, but each component of the community matters to each other because we are all connected. 

Then for our own uniqueness, there is something that only we can do in that particular way. Surely others can solve the same problem with a similar approach, but it will never be the exact same. Therefore, I say that we each have our own roles to play, and our own place in the world where we belong. Somewhere in that big puzzle yet tiny, each of us is still a piece, even though once the puzzle is solved nothing more can be done with it except for having a pretty jigsaw hanging up on the wall, else the puzzle can be disassembled for others to play with again.

Indeed, there is no objective meaning in the world. But we can have _our_ meaning instead. If we truly are seeking such a meaning and revolting against the meaninglessness of the world, I trust that making others' lives a bit better would be an important part. Because to some of the people around us, we are irreplaceable. No one truly dies until everything in the universe has forgotten about them. What we do might be as simple as being considerate of each other, however simply being remembered must be one of the greatest universal honours we can have, not taking into account God. Perhaps we will happen to change someone's life, even in a minuscule way, but that is still enough to leave our mark on the sand until the wind blows it away. We thus not have to believe in an everlasting kind of meaning or value in what we do, since death nullifies such, but even the transient but tangible actions that are clearly observable should be enough. Even if those little acts matter naught to the world, it matters in the here and now of the people that are currently around us. I believe such is enough for the happiness of mankind.

# E. Finale
Perhaps I am contradicting myself without even knowing, that I might have taken that leap of faith and unwittingly committed philosophical suicide. Still, perhaps my attempts at contemplating the absurd are still enough to keep it alive and valid. The world is meaningless, but we can still face it with passion, freedom, and revolt. Finding meaning and pretending that there is meaning through our ways of life, where the most we can do is grasping at that cosmically insignificant value that we have to those immediately around us. I think that is enough reason to be kind and considerate to others. I believe that on that road, faith can provide us with a good direction in making the world a slightly better place. 

Although we have no hope in our own meaning to the universe, we can trust that something good will happen simply because the probability of being on an unlucky streak is too rare to happen. Since when did the lack of hope ever equate to despair? As for the frequency of good things happening, I can't tell. Maybe it will look like a bell curve of normal distribution. To God, we perhaps have some incomprehensible meaning and roles to play, such as to glorify Him and His goodness. I don't really understand that myself, but if being good to others also is in line with that, why not? 

But the fact that I place so little value in my fate after death might as well make me an atheist. But since it's God's job to judge us later, I'll just leave it entirely in his hands and mind other business. After all, I believe that universally, we would be happy to see others happy, and if we are not, it simply means that we seek to be as happy as others. The fact that humanity universally seeks what is good through thousands of years of history is impressive, and from a religious point of view, probably because we were made in God's image of goodness.

[sisyphus]: https://www2.hawaii.edu/~freeman/courses/phil360/16.%20Myth%20of%20Sisyphus.pdf
[exurb1a]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jv79l1b-eoI
