---
layout: post
title: "(WIP) Discussion: The Blurred Line Between Reality and What Isn't"
category: discussion
---


# A. On Perception and Reality
There exists an objective reality that is completely independent of our perception. Our perceptions give us our very own reality, and it simply is how our brain translates the stimuli that we receive from that reality. And therefore, our perceptions are not reality. Let that be the premise.

And yet for myself, nothing has ever felt tangible enough. Once the event has passed, it no longer becomes tangible, no longer something I could grasp and perceive as it was originally, ever unchanging. Even if I was to hold an object in my hand and observe my present surroundings, I could almost notice how every passing second would never turn back, and what was tangible no longer is, instead something else is now the new reality. Admittedly I have become less detached over the years, however, it never really went away, I think.

Closing my hand, I could feel the fingernails digging into my palm. Once my hand releases itself and the sensations are subsidised, that feeling on my skin is no longer tangible. Even if it did hurt, it is also not tangible and can't be experienced again. Worse, even in the face of physical injuries, I could only perceive the pain in its present, and as much as my amazing imagination could recreate that sensation up to 90% in terms of being realistic (and less in intensity since the mind cannot invoke just the same amount of pain compared to that of the actual external stimuli), once the pain subsides, my body somewhat "forget" about it. Not that I forget what happened, but I could not recreate the same sensations again. And indeed if that was possible, then I could only believe that our mind is our greatest tormentor. At that point, the mind is everything that our perception is.

The reality is that I felt pain. The perception is that I could no longer feel it the exact same way again, not because I like pain similar to how a masochist does, but because if it cannot be reproduced or recalled similarly then it is meaningless. Reproducibility is a tenet of scientific experimentation. At that point, I realised the difference between our perception and reality. We can no longer reenact reality, and if even our mind cannot recall it, then although we know it as a fact that it happened, we could never retrieve that event simply due to the limitations in our perceptions.

It is a very odd thing. Let's say I was hugging a fluffy stuffed animal. In those very moments, I feel its soft fur and wish to keep cuddling with it. The next second I have to go and do something else and not having that fluffiness on hand, I realise I "forgot" the feelings of having it. Sure, I could recreate it with my mind fairly accurately. But then if I have to imagine not having that fluffy stuffed animal again, then is it any different from what I'm experiencing right now, having to be away from it?

Even if my body could remember and instinctively fear certain scenarios that could revoke unwanted memories, it never truly remembers its own experiences. By that, I mean that it could never be remembered accurately. Everything once gone is forgotten to at least 30-40%, and upon recreation inside the mind's eyes felt like an extremely realistic hologram.

# B. The Perception of Death as a Tangible Matter
Unfortunately, I have not yet been able to understand what death really means. It does occur to me that I would never be able to reach out to that person again, and they would never be able to reach out to me again. But is that any different from a long-distance relationship where we simply do not communicate? In such a peculiar relationship, although we keep each other in mind no words are ever exchanged. But in our memories, that friend of ours is still alive. Then death is the same - simply someone that has drifted away from us that we no longer keep in touch.

At that point, I struggled over what it truly means to die. Because if I remember that person, they are technically still alive in my mind. The abilities of my brain already allow me to recreate an almost perfect copy of that person's persona based on my understanding and experiences with them, then truly, just what is really tangible in the real person? I feel a bit disturbed in realising that my own projection of such a person, in reality, could almost replace that person themselves, to the point that I believe I would probably not feel a sense of loss because my mind would fill up the void.

Contradictorily, an imagination that could project anything in such a realistic manner ends up becoming my biggest obstacle in understanding what is real and what is not. Because such an imagination must first observe that which is real to recreate it. In the end, I could never perceive death, because nothing was truly ever taken from me.

Perhaps it is part of my personality too. Growing up I have never missed anybody, possibly because I was never really taught to do so, and in addition to my autistic trait, things could add up quickly. Back then even if I was away from my parents for a week or more at my relatives' house, I would barely ever call back, and I don't think back then we really have a tradition of keeping in touch so frequently. Then when I grow up, it simply is not in my nature to keep in touch with someone with meaningless small talk. At least, I see no point in asking a question if I already know the answer to it. 

# C. The Perception of Myself Versus Its Actual State
I realised I have forgotten a majority of my memories from the years during the Covid pandemic. At the time there are certain things that happened, and undoubtedly was the darkest days of my life as of the time of writing. Many says memory loss is also a sign of depression. But mysteriously, I have never understood how I emerged from that state. It seemed to just happen, but I doubt it is ever heavily related to my acceptance of the absurd.

And because I'm more in touch with the present, I noticed that minor inconveniences set me off a bit more deeply, but again I never hold grudges. But what if it is just a manic episode and I'll be back to that low again? Even though as a kid I laughed a lot at my mom's jokes and liked to ask trick questions, I never remembered when I started to think that I am funny. Indeed I do realise that I am, and I have always liked humors, having humorous memes on my phone collected from years before. It's just at the time, I was never in touch with that part of myself, that I start to now have doubts if humours are simply my own coping mechanism.

I have come to know that people can acts in contradiction to what they feel. As for myself, I like laughing about memes and such, as it provide me temporary reliefs from whatever that is my life at the time, but now I hope I can use humours as something to share with others. But I simply didn't want others to feel the same ways I did, to be in pain and lost, isolated from those who I thought would not persecute me when I was still trying to make sense of the world. I have once been criticised for smiling even though we were supposed to testify about painful matters, at the time I never understood how that particular person could tear up easily at something she is talking about, even if it is slightly exaggerated. I didn't know how to be emotional, but I guess that person did and has been that way for a long time.

# D. The Perception of Things Classified As Intangible
Opportunities, time, feelings, social statuses, you name it. Someone told me that I couldn't attach any value to anything, including things that are in reality tangible. I have a bad time with visualising numbers when comparing it to something much bigger. Still, things that are as intangible as those simply couldn't evoke much emotions in me. And perhaps only through emotions that I could recognise the importance of something even though they are forgotten of the quickest. I couldn't attach value to opportunities I do not understand, to the flow of time that has always been constant, to social statuses that go on behind closed doors which I can't touch. And there are even things I couldn't attach any value to for no explainable reasons.

It is for this very reason that I was many time criticised for not understanding how valuable the opportunities that I have are. Admittedly, a lot of them were unfamiliar which I cannot form any connections with. I do not understand why. Because even if there is a chance that I lose everything I have, I simply cannot imagine it. That which can't be visualised cannot be. Because I know that the moments I lose something, they become intangible, something that exist entirely within my mind. And if they are withheld in a mind that could project virtually anything on top of reality, then did I really lose anything? If it was an opportunity I never have, then what matters if I do not have it? Because again, I could not have visualised it. It is precisely this blurred line between reality and everything else that really reduce any value that something may have to nothingness.

A dangerous place, is it not? It begs the question of the importance of reality versus our perception of it. If the mind could replace and project anything, then why would reality be necessary when even the reality around us could be altered? The mind never remembers reality to begin with, but only the perceptions that arrived through the lenses that make up a person. 

I did mention in a previous post, but most of my memories are only remembered if tagged with some sort of emotions or significance. That temporary tag was all that is needed to remember something even if the tag itself disappear soon after. In fact, even pain is probably negligible, to some degrees. Let's say I pinched myself very hard, then although my body is aware of the pain, if my mind drift off then all sensations are just background noises. Interestingly, there are times when I was physically hurt, with one of them being to the point of bleeding out from a cut on my head. It was a shallow one, I believe. But I could not remember why I was hit, except that the one who inflicted the wound was very angry. No, it's wrong. I don't remember how I got that wound anymore. I can't bring back the image of the event, only for a fact that it happened. Well, if that isn't convenient.

The person who inflicted that particular wound on my head is a very emotional type of person. That person once wished that they could forget this particular event in their life (I was there when that event happened). Needless to say, I believe it was an extremely emotionally taxing time for that person. And yet when I have "willingly erased" certain memories, I realised it wasn't any good. I wasn't confused, I simply know that I intentionally choose not to remember it. Strange enough, I also forgot the reason why it wasn't a good idea to erase one's memories. I did know this reason before somewhere in May/June 2023 as I have told it to someone else. But now I too no longer know what it was. Maybe because you would truly forgotten? Or perhaps it would reduce your own feelings and emotions to the point of numbing? Or was it a sense of loss, because if it is I could not recall it. The fact that I'm doing just fine right now is highly contradictory of how it was. 

However, I do know that even if something traumatic to me happened, I would automatically dissassociate, which leds to a lack of records. Unless that incident last long enough to force a higher volume of input to my brain since my brain would not be able to filter out as much. Perhaps I now have figured it own. If the tag of a memory is an emotion or sensation, then losing that tag means forgetting. Especially if it is linked to a common emotion, in that case my brain would never know what to recall. 
