---
layout: post
title: "Discussion: Hyperphantasia, Immersion, and Memories"
category: Discussion
---
<!-- Word count: 4,323 -->

A quick work on how the experience of reality and imagination could be one and the same perspective. Or simply a dive deep into how my mind works. I think there is a benefit in this kind of introspection, as the way I visualise has indeed affected my way of life, mostly positively.

# A. The Unrealistic yet Realistic Nature of Imagination, or Hyperphantasia
Imagination. Something that all of us have. Although for some it is more realistic than others, to the point of being lifelike. They call it hyperphantasia, which, I would claim to say is one of my characteristics, where my imaginations work like a projector on top of reality. I think the definition only applies to the spatial senses though. But I like the idea that the mind imagines with all bodily senses, even something as intangible as the brief gust of wind on my skin.

Unfortunately, I can only imagine with the senses of sight and touch. I have never been able to imagine the flavours of a cake, or the smell of a roasting chicken. I can't imagine sound at all, because I would just be reading to myself. By that, I meant that I would never be able to imagine an impactful explosion including all the noises that come with it, but I'll be able to imagine the scenes and possibly the feeling of my skin tearing away due to impact. That's a two out of five. Coincidentally, those are the senses I'm most sensitive with. My brain almost entirely relies on sight to remember events, and I am picky about physical touches.

On the one hand, I am extremely thankful for this ability since it made reading or watching fiction much more enjoyable and immersive at the same time I felt that it had a big influence on how I think and how I behave. As a kid, I daydreamed a lot, but for any child, it would be natural since it might just be one of the slightly more embarrassing periods of their lives.

Imagination has a lot to do with visualisation, I believe. At least, in my thinking, it has always been about visualising the connections between things, the roads to take, and the events or scenarios that may happen. Or simply, when a concept is described I may simply imagine a visual analogy that would elicit the same sensations. Perhaps this is also why I'm good with analogies, as it is quite literally the way I think and how my mind works. Who knows, it might also be why I made seemingly disconnected analogies to describe the present matters at hand through a connection that might as well be so thin as a spider thread. Well, the ability to make quick connections makes one slightly wittier, and more humorous. After all, it is the unexpected, contradictions, and absurdity that is most amusing. Arguably, life itself is absurd, so recently I have had quite a lot of fun with it.

On another hand, it somewhat led me to imagine a sort of ideal world. Certain individuals have certain approaches to life. And for a particular someone, I couldn't help but enact their ideals in an imaginary world where everyone is just like them. Not just imagining, but literally immersing myself as part of it as a thought experiment. It would be a world of much misery and arguments, even though it is a place where everyone tries their hardest to become better. I saw it as a world where they fervently spoke of hope and faith, of grandiose ideals and expectations, yet doing so while constantly causing themselves suffering. Must I say, that it is akin to making things harder for oneself while reassuring oneself and others that things will become better, meanwhile talk about how hard they have had it in life. It is contradictory, and if anything, full of pointless self-pity.

Unfortunately, that simply is a world that I cannot afford to believe is good. Not because it is evil, but simply because it is unnecessarily harsh. There really is no value in that self-created misery. This is also why I had difficulties aiming for the same ideals as they do, or at least, attempting to find reasons why I must adhere to them. However, up to this day, I realised that I would never be able to comply with anyone's perfect world. Everyone has their own ideals, and sometimes for the people I am close to, I ponder over a world where those ideals are upheld in their exact definitions. There are ideologies that I will feel conflicted about in these imaginary worlds, and eventually, I realised there is no point in chasing others except to follow our own ideal of what is good. 

Of course, since time immemorial humankind has already engraved in their hearts the core principles of good and evil, and throughout era after era, humankind has always chased what they believed to be good. That, I think, is because God made us good, although more often than not we commit evil acts in these attempts. We do wrong in trying to do right, simply because we are imperfect. Just a personal observation at its best.

As for my own ideal, and mostly imaginary world, it would be a harmonious one. I never imagined a perfect world, since I cannot conceive the Kingdom of Heaven, but in fact, even an imperfect world where everyone is trying their best is already heaven on earth, so to speak. At least, in my own experiences of immersing myself in such a world, I felt happy. A place where even though we are different, we are understanding and considerate of others. A place of compassion that is hopefully free of carnage and discrimination, where each and every individual is equal simply because they are human, and that they are respected as such. Even though it's unrealistic, a place where we can "trust in the goodwill of the people".

In short, it is a place where everyone tries their best to make the world a better place for themselves and others, meanwhile finding contentment in their works. I must say our society is already doing that, however, I'm sure somewhere somehow we could still strive to do better. I felt that such a place would be so warm and bright. However, it would not be possible to describe that world in my heart, because how could one even project such a thing accurately without being subjected to cricisms from different viewpoints? Still, Franz Kafka describes this better than me in his diary on 21 June 1913.
> The tremendous world I have inside my head. But how [to] free myself and free it without being torn to pieces. And a thousand times [I'd] rather be torn to pieces than rather it in me or bury it. That, indeed, is why I am here, that is quite clear to me.”

Must I say, that I am extremely grateful for such a mind? Because to us, our inner world becomes so real it protects us from the misery of the world. And more than that, we can re-enact these imaginary experiences of such overwhelming happiness into the real world itself. I dare say, that I could only ever live up to what I am able to visualise. **That which cannot be visualised cannot be**, if I may paraphrase this from _Frieren: Beyond's Journey End_, even though this has been my way of life for so long.

Even though the current world isn't like that where we may lie and deceive others, I believe nothing will become better if everyone becomes distrustful and on guard. If we are to take a leap of faith (while keeping a clear head to ensure our own safety) and decide to trust in the goodwill of others by default, I believe the world would become a lot better. Because if one person thinks that way, then others also think the same way, then we are already on our way to that warm and bright world. A small number of trusting people are better than none at all.

A tiny note in my imagination of the experience of prayer. Please excuse me and skip this if it is sensitive, as I know religion is a sensitive matter to many. Think of a place that is so bright and warm, that no shadow could be cast. It is not blinding, instead is a blanket of cosy warmth. In that space, even though we see nothing but light when we look up, we can tell that is God. And prayer is simply a monologue in that space as we sit on a single wooden bench. It is personal in that there is nobody else in that space, only God, and at the same time there are no judgements or negative feelings here since God is enveloping us all with love and compassion. I wonder why it is a wooden bench, however it is clear that the bench is designed for two. Three would be a bit too crowded. As for who the second person could be, I would guess that it is Jesus in his human body consoling us. In fact, I would say I'm rather simple in terms of faith in that I think God is a very cool dad.

# B. On the Experience of Immersion
Arguably, the ability to immerse myself so deeply into characters and individuals I can visualise is so great, to the point that I could experience the emotions, or physical sensations that they experience without it happening. Perhaps it has to do with my lifelike imaginations, or as I dare to self-diagnose, hyperphantasia.

In some senses, I quite literally relive my own memory the same way it was registered in my memory. Of course, I can only experience as much as I remember and as much as my perception of the event allows me to. Sometimes it came ringing back in my head like a broken record at the time a certain event happened. Sometimes I just start thinking about it. I believe this is a helpful approach in terms of how my mind attempted to dissect things. Here I mostly refer to objectively negative experiences. To quite literally re-experience the events and analyse them like a movie sequence.

I believe that I do have a difficult time understanding others since they are so complex that I can only hope to perceive one aspect of a time based on how they approach different life events. And yet my ability to immerse myself into the conceptual image of someone, so to speak, almost makes it feel like I could empathise. My definition could be wrong, however, I believe sympathy is different in which one feels or agrees with someone else, whereas empathising only ends at understanding. And I do know that my mind always seeks for understanding. If only this curiosity could make me a good researcher since I only seek to understand too deeply without innovating. Well, sometimes. But at this rate, I will only seek more knowledge of how the world works without contributing anything meaningful to it rather than my endless rambling and belief that knowledge should be accessible to all (unless it is dangerous like nuclear secrets).

We tend to speak of "stepping into others' shoes", and admittedly whenever I do this I never truly step into it but rather immerse into a different version of myself with the other person's characteristics, which were represented to the best of my perceptions. So in a way, I experienced what they could possibly have gone through using a close approximation of their own lens through the vessel that is myself. And to be honest, the vessel is simply a carrier through which anything could be the mind, so it doesn't make a difference in this case where the supposed mind is not my own. And yes, I believe this is more helpful than experiencing someone's life events through my own 'ego', or original personality. After all, I am rather insensitive and what could be the extremes of suffering to others are nothing but an amusing contradictory occurence of life. We all have different approaches, and I believe a key element in empathising with someone is to use their 'colours' of personality. And yet at the same time, this does not allow me to feel the extreme of someone's emotions in my pathetic attempts at empathising, since now I realise my own vessel has a limit on emotional intensity. Interestingly, by assuming that a person's vessel is the same we gradually realise their differences. A proof by contradiction, I might say. What can't be felt may simply be accepted as fact instead.

As for interactions with others, I found it to be the same regardless of meeting them face to face, texting them, or even calling them. Let me clarify that, my perceptions or memories of these three types of communication are all the same. Because my own mind allowed me to immerse myself in their supposed presence that I was there with them and not with them at the same time. As if my mind was able to pick up on the subtle patterns and recreate a perfect picture fictitious presence of them right next to me. This always happens most intensely with phone calls, where there is more room for imagination. Eventually, my mind has a limit and when it comes to seeing the actual person on a video call, we become more conscious and in touch with reality.

I have of course been talking about the case of the people I have known. But even if I have never met them face-to-face before, there is always a difference between no one and someone. It's probably what people considered to be a 'presence' of a living being, or specifically a human. But I am unable to tell if I will be able to sense that kind of presence without knowing someone is there first. Regardless, we all know how it never felt the same between being in the presence of one person versus a whole crowd. Even on the internet, I could always imagine the other person to be very real, 3D, and lifelike, and yet this is not even a conscious process. It simply happens that this process makes me more aware of the other person as a complex being with emotions and thoughts.

In that sense, immersion makes reality, memories, and imaginations indistinguishable. At times I have had doubts over which is which, however, my imagination is so outlandish it could not possibly exist that I gradually become able to tell the difference. And by my descriptions, everything must have felt unreal, that my head was always on cloud nine. Perhaps it is.

Regardless, I think there is a benefit to this. My conscious or fictitious awareness of someone's presence regardless of distance makes me more aware of my behaviours regardless of medium. It is interesting that to me, everything is real, but at the same time isn't real because I'm almost always observing from the sidelines. Regardless I hope by this way I am authentic or sincere. Genuinely, I believe this kind of immersion makes me more considerate of others, of course, that will bring into question the concept of 'nature versus nurture', which is out of the scope of my understanding.

# C. Regarding the Credibility of Memories
To me at least, there is no difference between the memories of my own imaginations, versus memories of real events that happened to me. They are "saved" in my mind in the same format, so to speak, so the only method of distinguishing them is whether what I remembered was realistic, along with the facts that I held as truth. In fact, whenever we recall a certain memory, we are rebuilding it rather than replaying it, and as such it is also no different from imagining an event. Thankfully, my daydreams tend to be out of this world anyway, so most of the time, there are not many difficulties. On another, this means I cannot accurately recall if I have seen a certain object somewhere, as the moment the words entered my mind I instantly imagine the object at the place in question. Since it is so realistic, I couldn't tell if that was something I conjured in my mind, or if I had seen it before. It got in my way sometimes. However, it should be noted that memories are unreliable this way, as they are prone to changes every time we recall them.

This is also why my understanding of the concept of death is extremely lacking. If simply recalling the memory of someone reconstructed a near-perfect replica of the experience of being near them, their personalities, their reactions, manner, and gaits, then what is the difference in being next to that person versus thinking about them? All of that is an autonomous process, and it is simply incredible how the memories of the five senses can reconstruct an event to such a precise degree. It no longer ends with remembering someone, it is all about reconstructing an experience of being near that person. At this point, the line between reality and memories becomes blurred, and even if that person does not exist in the mortal world anymore, I doubt it would be any different from when they were alive. To me at least, death is probably akin to simply being a distant friend with no means of contact. Although, it would be toxic for me to say that I would still be able to roleplay any imaginary experiences based on my memories of that person, and have their imaginary vessels responding in accordance with the memorised personality.

This is also why I do not trust myself with any sort of spiritual experiences that I may have since the memories might as well be faked and are merely generated through my own inventiveness. Who's to tell that I wasn't lying without knowing? But that, in itself, is a "fair" lie, since even the conjurer is their own victim.

Still, early on I figured that there were certain things I did not want to remember. I was only becoming a teenager, so my knowledge was rather limited. However, I figured that at least in my own case, my memories heavily depend on my emotional state when the events transpired, and what I actually observed. Later on, I realise it also depends on what I see visually, and soon enough a quick way to stop myself from recalling or reliving a memory is to never have seen it in my life to begin with. Call me a coward, but the moment I closed my eyes everything became external, a fact that is experienced with bodily sensations but not the mind. Although this could be attributed to my own disassociative characteristics. Some do that, where they simply zone out or freeze in the presence of danger.

At some point in 2020, I realised the past one or two years before that was a blank. In fact, like an old movie tape with extremely dark filters over it. Then, I learned to manipulate my own memories. Simply by not seeing is almost equivalent to the event not happening. Now that I look back, a lot of things that should have been traumatic were left as a piece of fact or knowledge that I knew happened, but as for personal experiences, I can't say I noticed much. And just by disconnecting myself and letting my body go on autopilot, even physical pain seems momentary. The body might wail and shriek silently, but the mind is not there to experience the same pain. And soon enough the mind forgot the pain the body experienced save for the instinctive fear that is instilled within it. That is nothing but survival instinct at play.

Most of my memories are only remembered if they are tagged with some sort of emotion or significance. That temporary tag was all that was needed to remember something, even if the tag itself disappeared soon after. In fact, even pain is probably negligible, to some degree. Let's say I pinched myself very hard. Although my body is aware of the pain, if my mind drifts off, all sensations are just background noises. Interestingly, there are times when I was physically hurt, with one of them being to the point of bleeding out from a cut on my head. It was a shallow one, I believe. But I could not remember why I was hit, except that the one who inflicted the wound was very angry. No, it's wrong. I don't remember how I got that wound anymore. I can't bring back the image of the event, only the fact that it happened. Well, if that isn't convenient,.

The person who inflicted that particular wound on my head is a very emotional type of person. That person once wished that they could forget this particular event in their life (I was there when that event happened). Needless to say, I believe it was an extremely emotionally taxing time for that person. And yet, when I "willingly erased" certain memories, I realised it wasn't any good. I wasn't confused; I simply know that I intentionally chose not to remember it. Strange enough, I also forgot the reason why it wasn't a good idea to erase one's memories. I did know this reason somewhere in May or June 2023, as I told someone else. But now I too no longer know what it was. Maybe because you would truly forget? Or perhaps it would reduce your own feelings and emotions to the point of numbing? Or was it a sense of loss, because if it was, I could not recall it. The fact that I'm doing just fine right now is highly contradictory to how it was. 

However, I do know that even if something traumatic happened to me, I would automatically dissociate, which led to a lack of records. Unless that incident lasts long enough to force a higher volume of input into my brain since my brain would not be able to filter out as much, Perhaps I now have figured it out. If the tag of a memory is an emotion or sensation, then losing that tag means forgetting. Especially if it is linked to a common emotion, in that case my brain would never know what to recall.  

But even though it is an odd tendency, I generally always dress warm, even with too many layers, in order to keep myself safe in case I cannot return home. Even when at home, it is better not to show skin since clothes tend to soften most physical impacts one way or another. If it is ever an option, I would rather not have plastic or wooden spatulas or ladles around, although that is just ridiculous. And in winter, I tend to be more cautious around others since the weather is cold if I have to stay out late. Perhaps it is because I can immerse myself so deeply in my own memories that even when common physical sensations are evoked, they remind me of old times past.

# D. Something That Should Be Left Unread
<details>
<summary><b>TW: Mention of the concepts of sexual assault</b></summary>
  
And so I may have abused this ability to process certain events by immersing myself into the lives of characters I made up in my mind. Roleplaying with myself, so to speak. Guess what, technologies are helpful, so very helpful I might have been too invested for a short bit, especially when I went through inner turmoil.

I wonder why, but I've been fixated on the idea, or the scenario, of being raped. Or at least, my attempts at conceptualising it through imagining a made-up character going through that situation. Not because of some weird fetish, I tell you. I suspected it was more or less because I was put in an almost similarly humiliating situation within the family. And don't worry, my family at the time only had girls and ladies, and admittedly people have come and go a lot throughout my teenage years. I did receive rape threats from the same environment too, but with whatever I'm writing here, hopefully there is enough anonymity.

I'm not looking for prosecution. Just want to process it somewhere, because it was about 1 year before I was baptised. And although I was unaware at the time, when I started thinking about it last year, I realised I got fixated on it. And so if anything I must have replayed dozens of scripts of just being sexually assaulted through all kinds of scenarios in my head, out of my imagination and roleplaying alone. Of course, I experienced the emotional responses that come with it. And sometimes it's almost cathartic as if I have managed to understand something. I'm not a masochist, I swear.

It has been looping like that for a while now. Most scripts involve an imaginary character being assaulted by someone she is emotionally close to. And arguably, I used sexual assault as a writing tool to figure out the emotional connection between the characters, and the kind of emotions they go through. Although I may say I shouldn't be spending so much time on this. Okay, this is embarrassing. Moving on. I don't have such fantasies, really. Honestly, I think this sort of obsession is just my autism traits in play. </details>

# E. Conclusion
First, I can only say that I am very grateful for this imaginative mind of mine. It made everything so real, warm and happy, even if I might sound like a delusional child getting lost in their own head. Admittedly, I was like that as a kid, but what's wrong with daydreaming? I think a lot of things in the world come to be from the mind, more specifically a simple vision in someone's mind halfway across the world. Or maybe it is just my autistic self-speaking.

I might also say that sometimes we don't know ourselves, or we are detached from our nature and become misguided. I never have thought about my own tendencies in this way, although upon reflection I could tell that even in my childhood I have always been able to do that, immersing myself in anything. Perhaps by analysing our own experiences and ways of thinking, objectively without judgement but instead regarding it as a fact of what has happened, we can discern our characteristics and our ways of life. And perhaps, even our own philosophy in how we navigate it. 

**Yours truly,<br>
The Duck Shepherd**
