---
layout: post
title: "Moral Dilemma: Is There a Limit to Kindness?"
category: moral dilemma
---
<!-- Word count: 3,016 -->

Here is the question of the day. Do note that in this context, we assume that we have the resources to help someone, and there is a clear-cut choice that we can make.

<h3>Is There a Limit That Once Reached, We Should Stop Being Kind to Someone?</h3>

**A. Yes**. We should stop being kind or helping someone once they have used up too much of our resources, or if they are a bad person, or if they are undeserving.

**B. No**. We should be kind to others as much as we can in our capacity, without expecting anything in return.

I believe this is more of a debate, and a majority of answers would fall into the circumstances of the person doing the helping and that of the person being helped. As such I would expect the answer to either be one of 'Yes' or 'No', with certain conditions. Regardless, I think this one would be a short work.

# A. Scene 01: The Kinds Without Expectations
Simple enough, we assume that our original motive or ideal is to help others without expectations. And that really is kindness, I think, to help others for the sole purpose of making their life a bit better. This means we do not expect any form of reciprocation or gratitude from the other person, however, we trust that they will have a better life and that simply seeing that our work made a difference is enough to make us happy. We would help them as much as we can. At least, when I was a kid, a family member always told me to be kind to others and to help them without expecting a return. Perhaps it's also why the concept is somewhat ingrained in my mindset.

Again, being kind does not mean we must help others. Sometimes what people need is to do things themselves, but with the knowledge that there is someone they can reach out to for help or advice. We should let people be independent rather than completely relying on us. 

However, do note that the positive outcomes where our kindness is being used correctly would only be guaranteed in an ideal world. In our flawed world, it is still better to make sure that there is a certain guideline to ensure that our kindness is not put in the wrong place. Note that sometimes we can help someone less and that is still sufficient for the other person since we also have our own lives too. But this is a careful decision to make.

1. **The person we help must not be an objectively bad person with bad motives, and we are not helping them in their wrongful cause**. By the word 'objectively', I imply that such a person is against the universal tenets of morality in a clearly visible manner. In this case, we should not help them by contributing to their awful works, but if it is within our capacities, to advise them. This depends on how terrible they are as a person. For the religious, we can also pray for them.
  
2. **We are not being exploited for our kindness**. Again, the term 'exploit' means different for each person. However, what I mean is that if our help is being **continuously and intentionally misused** and diverted for good purposes, we should bring up this matter. Of course, people have a choice in how they use what we have given them. But it is not great if our support is being used for something completely unrelated, and although it might be due to a lack of discipline that led them astray, in the meantime we should maintain minimal support while they navigate matters. _What matters is that we still let others know that they are not being abandoned._

3. **It does not take up too much of our resources to the point that it severely affects our lives negatively.** Sometimes we see that others are in great distress and wish to put in our efforts to help them. However I believe it is still possible for us to enlist others' help, and at the same time if it starts to overwhelm us we should also take a step back to maintain balance. This is important not only to ourselves but also to how we treat others as a result since the imbalance in our lives could produce a domino effect that affects our other work with people around us. Of course, this is only if the problem is objectively present, because it is possible for us to be overwhelmed over the little things that might not have matter at all, and yet it is our feelings (thoughts derived from emotions) that would make the decisive call based on it. Inherently, I would not wish to withdraw my own kindness to others especially if it impedes them greatly, or when they are in great distress.

Let us proceed to the potential answers. Indeed, when one has no expectations, then it no longer matters the answer of 'yes' or 'no'. In fact, I would say that we would not impose a limit on our kindness at all, save for the above precautions. Because if it was done correctly through an objective lens, then at no point would we limit our kindness toward others due to personal grievances. Even if our personal feelings about someone are negative simply because of our differences, I'm certain that we would not hesitate to help them as long as they do not have bad intentions.

# B. The Kind with Expectations
We know of the terms of unconditional love, or likewise, unconditional kindness, but more often than not we say that as humble human beings, we could not help but have a limit. In some ways that is completely valid, but there is a thin line to tread since it is very easy for us to excuse ourselves from helping others. However, I may say that this limit comes from the fact that we do not have endless resources. It may sound demeaning to say that we have no more resources to help others and that they may be discarded, but instead, it is perhaps kinder to say that we can only maintain a minimum level of support for someone, rather than cutting them off completely especially if they are not ready. 

But, there is a clarification to pay heed to. Although the material resources we have and our capabilities are limited, I believe that we can offer unconditional kindness in our hearts. I believe that we would never exhaust ourselves if that is the case, since we would love and be kind to others regardless as we look out for them. For once, I believe that it's simpler to keep our hearts open rather than closed, or I am simply too naive, that I trust others without doubts unless there is evidence for an objective judgement of their foul personalities, just like how in the Court of Law (particularly in the United States), that there is a Presumption of Innocence until proven guilty with Proof Beyond a Reasonable Doubt.

Then, the sort of kindness with expectations may possibly be the one in which we close our hearts to others. Although I would say that all of us would want to provide unconditional kindness to others, I do know that some people simply don't want to help anybody (we don't consider them here). Some don't help as much as they can, but at least, there is an effort and perhaps it is out of their own ignorance (including myself). But the expectations that I am referring to do not concern that as much as the fact that sometimes, we (un)consciously demand that our favours be repaid, not necessarily with materials but also in other manners.

Do note that this is a spectrum, and this is merely some possibilities. For example, sometimes we want to be thanked for our support, and sometimes we want to receive acts or expressions of gratitude. In some ways, we want others to look at us with respect (we should respect others regardless of what is done for us or to us), and we want to be treated right. There are also differing opinions over what is considered 'being treated right'. Although these expectations help us make sure that people do not simply walk all over us (however with wisdom I believe we can still be unconditionally kind to others without being exploited), there are flaws that come with it, most notably, because expectations are subjective.

Subjective expectations bring about subjective judgements, and at some points, we forget that what we do is no longer aligned with who we were in the past. A kind priest once told me that "expectations set you up to be upset". And, that simply is because once we become more attentive to our expectations or demands of a favour repaid from others, we become more attentive to our dissatisfaction. Speaking from personal experiences, not everyone expresses gratitude in the same manner or magnitude as each other. Although this is an extreme edge case, I myself am not capable of intense feelings, since I never was capable of giving my emotions much thought after I have resolved them; everything thus becomes an introspection. 

Then, where does our dissatisfaction come from? From the discrepancies between our expectations and others' capacities to match them. Especially since we would feel that we have been wronged, that we have helped someone we shouldn't have given how much resources, time and support we have given them. In fact, we might even believe that the one we helped was an ungrateful and terrible person, even though objectively the world would not consider it enough to be condemned, as personal feelings have never been sufficient as proof beyond reasonable doubt. We come to hate them, and we come to resent them. In fact, we consider stripping them of all support and everything they have had that was made possible thanks to our help for them. The world has never run on the principle of "because I can make your life better, I can also ruin it". The tenets of human morality and kindness as never been about having such kind of control, in that case, we should never have received any kindness from others for fears of submission, nor should we help others if we realise that we would then seek to 'control' them in such a manner. While I'm speaking of fairness here, I am aware that with emotions involved nothing has ever been completely fair. 

Our emotions warped our memories of events, moulding them to match our emotions. And that is why I said we should be as objective and prudent as possible in our judgements because our minds are so unreliable by themselves. It is completely risky to rely on the trust that others would reciprocate, but that is exactly where our wisdom comes into play to ensure that we never overstep the appropriate boundaries. Because first and foremost, it is still our safety. We may overwork ourselves, but it is always prudent to reflect and decide if we can rebalance ourselves while still ensuring that it does not impede others in exchange. In helping others, we are the ones who take the lead, and with that comes responsibilities. For those who have power over others, I expect that are wise enough to use it appropriately because it is those underneath who have to trust those above them. That is the same for any kind of authoritative body, including parents, executives, world leaders, team leaders, et cetera.

At least, for those who believe that kindness must be repaid, then their answer would most likely be a 'yes', since those who firmly believe in that ideal, then they would only help those they think are deserving of it. And in reality, I don't think that anyone would be able to meet the expectations completely, then in the end kindness loses its meaning and resembles a transaction more than anything. Even if expressing one's gratitude for a favour done is absolutely the right thing to do, it should come from the heart first and foremost rather than from an outside expectation. Sometimes out of a person's ignorance, they are unable to recognise what has been done for them; in that case, it is best to simply make sure that they are aware of what they should know. However, it is still their heart that has to make the decision. From what I have seen, no one can force a person to have certain emotions, including gratitude, but can only manipulate the environments that would induce it, but even so it is only an attempt and thus not definite.

In my own way, I trust that others would acknowledge my help for them, but at this stage, I think it already tilts toward not having expectations at all.

# C. Introspection
The same person who has many times stated that she would not like to help those who are ungrateful to her (in layman's terms, however, it is more complex than I could explain here), is also the same person who once asked me if "she should still help someone even though she knows that the person she helps would not please her expectations of gratitudes and such". That applies to me as well. Here the word 'please' means an approved action, and admittedly, I do have a penchant for words that can be easily be taken out of context yet still have so many nuances in interpretations. I at least felt that long sentences, when done right, convey more complete meanings than anything else thanks to the flow. 

Back to the point, that person said that she would still help that person because it was the right thing to do. And now that I think about it, that's probably what I should have done too, not because I will be able to overcome that personal grudge, of sorts (I don't have any), but because it makes their life a bit better, and it's the right thing to do anyway. To this day I still do not understand fully her impressions and opinions about me, nor do I know if she approves of me since she is a rather critical person, for a good reason too. I like to imagine that it is some form of love-hate relationship from her end, but as for myself, I see no reason why that means I should treat her or anybody else with contempt. 

Admittedly I found her to be rather admirable despite our differences. I felt that I was the opposite of who she is which is somewhat undesirable for her, and that is somewhat absurd on its own, but for the most part, I do appreciate her love for me. On another hand, I never minded our differences, however, I do hope that she too is happy. Indeed it is too elementary to wish for something better out of others, yet strangely I have never thought so but question myself about the thought processes which others went through, thereby the ways in which they derive differing opinions. Many questions in my life have been about my lack of understanding of others, and perhaps my curiosity about them, rather than pondering over why they would not change or think differently, different in the way that I could understand. What joys are there if we have already understood everything that the universe has to offer?

That person has also brought up an interesting conundrum, in that their faith in people diminished due to the fact that the people they have helped have not treated them right. Now, I must warn you that this is subjective, and of course, it is more simple to say that these people did not meet her expectations. As for myself, I never saw any relevancy between individuals, that is, why would someone treat me badly because someone else completely unrelated in the past did not treat me right? I think I have an easier time containerising my impressions of someone to that specific person only, and not letting it leak through into my perspective of others or the world as a whole. As for my answer, being treated with ungratefulness in the past wouldn't really impede me in helping others, except that if they were genuinely terrible people then I simply have to improve my 'screening' abilities a little. In fact, I probably didn't even think about it once I helped someone.

While I can see the logic in how our hopes in humanity can decrease after having been wronged many times, I have never really gotten to understand why people reach that point. Because I remember that back in my darkest hours yet (at the time of writing), I had never thought the world was a terrible place. That is simply because of the logical argument that it only takes one piece of evidence to prove something wrong, but it takes every possibility to be proven true just to maintain that something is true. Then, the fact that there is still kindness in the world has already disproven the statement that the world is terrible. Perhaps the very logic that more often than not drives people to despair might also be a saving grace, that is if their rationality still follows them. Or perhaps I haven't got that bad just yet.

# D. Conclusion
I expect that each of us has a different answer on the spectrum. Although I at least attempt to maintain an unconditional kindness to others in my heart, even though all I have ever said are words. I doubt that I have ever helped as many people compared to those who claim that kindness is only for those who deserve it, especially since they have helped more people than I did. Actions work better, and even though I might have the right philosophy it doesn't matter if I can't do anything to follow up with it. But hopefully, it helps me navigate life better.
