---
layout: post
title: "This World is a Contradiction"
category: discussion
---
<!-- Words count: 2,693 -->

Contradictions, I dare say, are the hallmark of absurdism. Yet that is not the reason this discussion came to life. However, it is truly odd that we never thought much of the contradictory nature of everything around us, and thus the absurdity of the world. But even so, there is meaning, or perhaps not, that we can still find in it.

# A. The Contradiction of Truth, of the Universe
First, if attention may be brought to this statement by Aristotle, as quoted by Albert Camus in his essay The Myth of Sisyphus:
> The often ridiculed consequence of these opinions is that they destroy themselves. For by asserting that all is true we assert the truth of the contrary assertion and consequently the falsity of our own thesis (for the contrary assertion does not admit that it can be true). And if one says that all is false, that assertion is itself false. If we declare that solely the assertion opposed to ours is false or else that solely ours is not false, we are nevertheless forced to admit an infinite number of true or false judgments. For the one who expresses a true assertion proclaims simultaneously that it is true, and so on ad infinitum.

This statement simply brought forth the contradiction of (philosophical) truth itself. In asserting that something is true, we are also obligated, by our own logic, to assert the falsity of something else. Furthermore, we are also obligated to prove the truth beyond our assertion that nonetheless derives from it. If one is to take the meaning of understanding to be one of unification (as Albert Camus understood it), or, in my own words, to understand is to reconcile concepts in a harmonic manner, then the world is incomprehensible. The world is at odds with itself, yet its puzzle pieces nevertheless fit perfectly together so that the cogs are still running. This contradiction, by itself, is the proof of further contradictions born from it. One may admit that the truly absurd matter is the fact that our mind cannot understand and that, in our own comprehension, we are already absurd. Then, is the fact that we are using such an imperfect mind to solve a problem not absurd in itself, knowing that even a perfect premise with an imperfect tool yields nothing but falsehood?

Oddly, 8 billion members of humanity, regardless of whether they realise this, are still living amidst this chaos. This is tantamount to saying that nobody noticed the elephant in the room, even when such a recognisable matter is clearly visible. For those who saw it, would it be possible to not fall into a philosophical dilemma and instead move on with life without batting an eye? If humanity seeks to understand, then there is no reason for such a problem to not be given attention. The fact that there is no equation of physics that explains everything in the universe already shows how much of a patchwork this world looks like to us. Perhaps one may consider the complete solution of the universe to be a piecewise function, but it is nevertheless the probable truth that all we ever did was find the closest approximation to the equation of the world. Did we ever come close? One is right until proven wrong, even if what used to be the truth was backed by false empirical evidence. Perhaps it is we who must accept the fragmented nature of the universe, that it is merely pieces of fabric clumsily patched together.

Even concepts that are opposite each other still belong to each other. What a contradiction this too is! This must be the result of the innumerable characteristics that are present in each and every concept, tangible or intangible. Is it even possible for anything to not have a similarity to each other, and is it even possible for anything to not contradict each other? Even if we compare an object with itself, it too is contradicting its own essence. Once realised, one will always remain conscious of that truth. I dare say this too produces great psychological tension. And that is the nature of the absurd, for the absurd cannot sustain its existence without being contemplated and, consequently, is constantly revolted against in our futile attempt to seek reconciliation.

Shades of black and white are both opposite of each other, yet they are similar in that they are both shades. Heaven and hell are on the complete opposite spectrums, yet their similarity lies in the existence of both. Undeniably, a concept manifests and exists the moment the mind thinks of it. All matters and concepts in the universe are interconnected by the bare minimum of their own existence. The fact that they exist already renders the hypothesis "There exists one thing that is completely opposite of another thing" false. First and foremost, something must exist in order to be compared. And because of its own existence, the hypothesis collapsed on itself. Even if we are to ignore the common characteristic of existence in all concepts, undoubtedly we can all point out some similarity between what can be completely unrelated concepts. The star in the distance and a milkshake are both made of atoms.

Must I say more about how absurd the world is? If even contradictions can have a friend in their own contradictory nature, then truly any contradictions have negated and contradicted themselves. Just as Aristotle implied, the assertion of any truth leads to the assertion of any derived falsehood, and in doing so, the truth has negated itself.

And yet, it is not the world that is absurd. It is the irrationality of human thoughts that is absurd. Truth brings about paradoxes, and paradoxes in turn negate the truth from which it came. Of course, I'm also risking the possibility of some forms of well-formed truth that are complete and perfect, to the point where no paradoxes can happen.

# B. The Contradiction that is Ourselves
Admittedly, the contradiction of truth renders all of our judgements inconsequential to the bigger picture. If falsehood is to be discarded, then no concepts, morality, or standards would remain. Each of us seeks out that which is convenient to us. At times, one may realise how much of a walking contradiction each of us is. Surely knowing about such matters must bring unease to our hearts, for we love what we can understand and dislike that which we can't. However, this is in no way a negation of humanity's passion for confronting what we can't understand in an attempt to solve the bigger puzzle, which is visible to a certain extent. The mind is wonderful in terms of its ability to reconcile itself. Because to seek understanding is to seek connections as well. If I may add, even contradictory concepts are similar because they both contradict themselves.

In saving someone, we turn our backs on others. In upholding absolute, universal justice, one risks becoming a dictator. Even in my own short life on this planet, everyone around me presents many contradictions in themselves that might just make my head explode. The most loving person I know of is most susceptible to feelings of betrayal, and in doing so, such a person can easily become full of hatred, not even believing in her own goodness. The most caring person I know of realised everything was too overwhelming and thus decided to care for themselves as a priority, not that this was not justified. Someone who seemed calm and had things manageable turned out to have so much turbulence underneath. And myself, who could never understand or relate to others emotions or even care, would now seek others' happiness (partly because I can make myself happy and now hope to make others happy). Someone who told me that my mistakes, which were never as bad as committing crimes, are the same as murdering someone and saying a late apology; that same person inflicted both mental and physical harm on those closest to me. One truly becomes a contradiction of one's own words.

On another note, I grew up in a pretty odd family as a tiny kid. We did not have issues expressing affection, but when we are apart, it simply becomes a matter of "out of sight, out of mind." We are aware of each other's existence, and none of us pushed or complained about whether or not enough hugs or kisses were given during the day. As natural as it was, I grew up without knowing how one is supposed to express affection to family members, which eventually caused an unpredicted misunderstanding. Certain people around me condemned me for seemingly being emotionless and uncaring, and at the time I thought that the way I was raised was not right. But in the end, that kind of background became one of the greatest gifts I had been given in my life. Precisely because of it, I have never been able to go out of control and remain objective all the way through. I dare say that it is also in my nature that I grew up a bit more inquisitive. One never knows when something might be a blessing in disguise.

The essence of ourselves may turn us away from that very essence while we become something completely opposite. One swings between spectrums when they decide to act just too much or too little on that essence. To remain objective is to remain neutral, a perfect middle. It is not a question of whether this will solve the contradiction in ourselves, but clearly, one must be aware of one's own contradiction first and foremost. One may realise that the opposite of any number is its negative or positive counterpart. The only place where a number's own opposite is itself is the number zero. Although this is a flawed method of expression, I believe a solution exists where one's own contradiction is oneself. That is, instead of straying away from our core, we return to right where it was. And that possibly requires an awareness of where that middle ground, that zero mark, is. I leave you here with a quote from Krishnamurti ([Source][krishnamurti]), which I do encourage further reading upon:
> Awareness is observation without condemnation. Awareness brings understanding, because there is no condemnation or identification but silent observation. If I want to understand something, I must observe, I must not criticize, I must not condemn, I must not pursue it as pleasure or avoid it as non-pleasure. There must merely be the silent observation of a fact. There is no end in view but awareness of everything as it arises. That observation and the understanding of that observation cease when there is condemnation, identification, or justification.

# C. The Contradiction Inherent in Our Perceptions
The components of the world are interconnected. Unironically, even though we have substance, 99% of atoms are in a vacuum. The universe that seemingly looks like a void full of nothingness is everything that we can ever have from this physical universe. And all that we have is really nothing beyond our observable universe. Meaningless and insignificant to whatever is out there. And yet, we pay no heed to the elephant in the room and move on with our lives. I am not unfamiliar with those who seek to attach meaning to whatever they do, from who they are to their beings and essences. This is not excluding myself as well, as I believe humanity always unconsciously attaches meaning to make sense of their surroundings. Just how many times have we uttered, "Then what have I been doing all this for?" We place value in our time, too.

At the same time, we reject the meaninglessness, or perhaps a large number of us do. I have heard of many comments such as "What you are doing is meaningless,"  "What is the meaning of such people?" and "Why do we need this, or why do we even need them?". What remains interesting is not the fact that we, indeed, are meaningless creatures on this Earth, but the fact that our attitudes towards the meaningless are so contradictory. There seems to be a defauly association that we would only need meaningful things, and any meaninglessness should be discarded. Which is to say, we have made ourselves dependent on the concepts of meanings, for without which it seems that one can't go on. If one were to fully reject meaninglessness in this manner, it is akin to rejecting oneself altogether. If a person realised this, would they not have committed suicide, for their lies have no more meaning in their existence?

To ask for the meaning of something implies that we ourselves cannot find meaning in that particular matter, to the point that we must seek it from someone else. Here, I may say that the concept of meaning is probably born from how something associates with or matters to us. If it matters to us, it means something to us. If it is relevant to our values, we would not like it destroyed. Then, why is it that we impose what is meaningful and what is not on others? Must we destroy what seems meaningless, even if there are possibilities that it may mean something to others? In fact, I have never been able to understand why meaninglessness is treated with such disdain; the concept itself is foreign to me.

Because meaning is something that we attach, it is inherent that we can create meaning for ourselves. Why should we not create meaning from things that are meaningless? Because in our nature, that is exactly what we have been doing for ourselves—giving ourselves values and purposes even when our existence means nothing to the unfeeling universe out there. I dare say that it is precisely because we are nothing that we can become anything. This is a paraphrase of a quote from an anime I used to watch, since credits should be given when they are due. Nothingness gives us liberty and freedom, but not abandonment, for we are not obligated or tied to anything. We can choose our own ties. For the religious, God is with them. But nothingness is our everything, and because of this, we truly belong in the universe. Embracing that fact has never been about alienation, for it is not only ourselves but everything else that lacks intrinsic meaning. Through this, we are of common interest, where we seek to make something out of the seemingly nothingness that has been given to us. And yet, it is only nothingness because we have yet to lay our hands on it. Once touched, it becomes our everything. Humanity is amazing in the way that everywhere they go, they bring something with them. 

And I believe that this is the essence of the absurdists. 

There is no need to shy away from the meaningless, the nothingness. Because of it, we can create anything and become anything. Meaninglessness is only a matter of perspective. Then, if we can embrace all that exists, we truly do have everything. Because even if God created everything, what is God to a non-believer? To a person, it does not matter if meaning comes from God; as blasphemous and wrong as it might be, it matters that a person is able to feel it. Meaning comes from humanity's acceptance of what they have. Then, even meaninglessness would be able to bring us immense joy.

# D. Finale
Contradictions are a bit of an intellectual challenge of sorts, akin to paradoxes. Even though so many things contradict themselves, including us human beings, we still exist, and the universe still exists. Then, perhaps what we considered contradictory might just be an illusion of our mind, for if they were true paradoxes, they would be unsolvable. In an unsolvable paradox, its premise can never exist in full; otherwise, something must be missing such that the gears remain running for it to coexist. Then, in a world of apparent paradoxes, the absurd lies in the human mind's inability to comprehend the world around them, and perhaps the world is actually not a patchwork but a well-designed machine. 

[krishnamurti]: https://kfoundation.org/krishnamurti-the-first-and-last-freedom-on-awareness/
