---
layout: post
title: "Discussion: On Anger and Impulse"
category: discussion
---

Anger is a human passion, so to speak. Here I am speaking of passion as strong and intense emotions. Perhaps this is more of a discussion over how I've seen anger being expressed in others around me.

# A. Anger
I imagine anger is a common response when something unjust has been done to oneself. Apparently, people can get angry even at the memories of what happened, grudges, and the like. I wonder if it feels like meltdown. Unfortunately, I can never understand why people remain angry for so long. But apparently anger seems to be a basis for grudges and desires for revenge. Perhaps it is a blessing that I can't get angry, since it frees me from lots of troubles associated with those feelings. In replacement, I mostly felt annoyance, irritation, and frustration instead. Anger and frustration are not the same thing. 

Frustration comes from the feelings of helplessness, the inability to change what happens around them. I believe it "evolves" from irritation, especially when someone is constantly pressed about it. At the same time, I can't get angry for so long since my forgetfulness wouldn't allow me to remember what someone has said to me. I just know it was terrible words, and if talked about, I might remember. That's just how ADHD is. I even forget how I felt previously. In fact, if the aggressor speaks nicely to me again after the argument, I would almost instantly forget what they said. But this mostly applies to a one-time argument. For those who have always shown contempt toward me, it became natural for me to avoid them simply to not hear further from them. I might not have a conscious feeling of anger, but perhaps a fear or strong avoidance that drives me away from them. For those who hurt people close to me, I don't exactly feel anger in the long run, but I would have conscious thoughts that I don't like them.

Still, this isn't safe since I would not be able to protect myself if I forgot the harm that was done to me. It allows me to forgive AND forget, but sometimes it is necessary to not forgive or forget at all. 

# B. Meltdowns
From the above, I am generally very chill and calm. Sure, I've been confused for most of my life about things. But I don't get a lot of emotional responses when people are being weird, annoying, or just mean to me. I do feel annoyed and think that the other is unreasonable. Perhaps it's also because of alexithymia. I highly suspect that I do have alexithymia as part of my (suspected) autism. And usually I'm quite logical, so I do not buy into people's weird arguments that are only driven by emotions and a desire to win. There's no winning or solving any issues with arguments like that. 

Stil, I do get meltdowns, and this is common in autistic individuals. Here's another thing: I do get explosively mad. It's basically imploding. Yes, I have thrown my phone before (it's doing fine). I have also thrown a chair (it's a plastic chair). And because this practically did not happen before, I was actually starting to question if I was as calm as I thought. I never scream at people. But I have once screamed out of frustration. And it was literally the opposite of who I was. I was stomping my feet and wanting to do all sorts of things, like just wandering off somewhere or punching someone back. Fortunately, I've never had the guts to punch people since that would hurt them. But it would not stop until I tire myself out, and fortunately, it doesn't take long for me to get tired. Meltdowns can happen over the most trivial things but are always from some kinds of overloads, intense anger or frustration, etc.

I do know that autism does make impulse control harder. Well, it is also a part of ADHD. And when I get angry, it just instantly flares up. One second, I'm all chill. There are no indications that my anger was rising. The next second, I would be tempted to throw everything around the room.

And that's really what a meltdown is, I think. I would be wanting to cry, to scream, and to throw stuff. But I have enough sanity even in those episodes to not do things that could endanger people or could cause serious damage. Recently, I've figured out that when I do feel that kind of anger, I can recognise it. It might be irrational, but it's fine. Just feel it and let it calm down gradually, and in the meantime, do not engage again. Even though it was about to implode, my expression would just look absolutely confused, staring and blinking. So people wouldn't even know until it got bad.

Meltdowns typically happen when something really annoys me. Or when a boundary is crossed. Recently, someone who is nearly 30 years older than me just seems to get petty. I was simply asking if they could not grab me by my clothes like that, and they pulled at it again. Then I ask if they can just not touch me in general; they keep pulling once and just walk off. It didn't hurt, but I was somewhat close to just throwing something at their face. I simply can't understand the lack of understanding, the childish nature of that action alone. If it was a school, that would be considered bullying.

When I was in primary school, I did hit people with rulers or sticks. I realise that it was simply impulsive anger. Mini-meltdowns. A certain action would suddenly spark me to chase after them and try to hit them. I didn't really understand myself, and of course, why would any primary school kids? But I even threw a phone once because the autocorrect ticked me off. And since the phone didn't crack, I must have thought it was acceptable to do it. So I threw it again when it ticked me off, but this time the phone slid across the room and cracked. That incident made me feel deeply regretful and ashamed for at least 5 years after that, but now I'm over it.

At the start of this year, a phone call made me angry, and I threw my phone again. I was surprised too, because it must have been almost 10 years since the last time I threw my phone in anger. But now that I linked back those incidents, they were meltdowns. Impulsiveness that I did not yet learn to control. But not a lot of things make me feel like that, and if it does, someone really has crossed the line. I usually either calm down by myself or just tear off old papers to let off some steam. My emotions die down pretty quick, so it isn't all bad. Funny, isn't it? I never thought things from the past were all linked.

On another occasion, I was accused wrongly of something and ended up screaming and stomping like a madman. I've never felt so overwhelmed before, and I didn't even recognise my capabilities to even get that mad over something. It dies down a bit, but because the event turns into an argument after, it seems to have triggered mini-meltdowns in between where I would be stomping and all because I couldn't express myself any other ways. And yet that person interprets it as an act of defiance, one of those "how dare you?" Well, that person wasn't autistic; how would they know? Either way, I was exhausted for the entire evening.

Having a job drains a person's energy at the end of the day. And I've also noticed that I "flare up" a bit easier. Accusatory comments that I used to flick off suddenly raised something in me—an impulse to snap back. It only makes sense. When the most terrible things happened to me, I was not exhausted by responsibilities or anything, so I don't get bothered just as much. Beside, I barely understood what happened. But ever since I have a job, my emotional reserve dwindles quite a bit; maybe only 40% is left. It made me more prone to snap back at people to correct their accusatory words. And of course that particular person thinks it's me being ungrateful or defiant. Try being autistic, I guess. So far, it hasn't gotten to screaming or meltdowns, though. But it has been close. 

I meant that person thought I did it on purpose and always discard it as being dramatic. Well, screw what they think. I'm not here to try and get one person to understand me right, since it's so clear how large the gap between us is. Their personality is not one that would compromise with my weirdness. And beside, being austistic means being misunderstood sometimes. I can find someone else who is a bit more accepting toward me for me to share those things. In the end, everyone needs a companion to share things with at the end of the day. I simply am not willing to leave the matter in their hands, since clearly it's a deadlock. So I'll find my own friends somehow.

# C. Tantrums
It never occurs to me that sometimes people throw tantrums and express their angers out of an actual conscious will. I understand the bits about being frustrated about something and have a serious conversation with them to have it changed. But sometimes there's actually tantrums thrown intentionally to get attention or to get what one wants. In a way, it's a learnt response too.

But here's the difference. People throwing tantrums can redirect their focus elsewhere. Perhaps a child didn't get to pick the shirt they want and got mad, so if the parents let the child take their desired shirt, they will stop crying and switch focus to something else. Being an autistic person is just too different from that. If we get a meltdown, we don't stop; we can't switch focus. In this sense, I have never truly experienced anger or tantrums. It has always been frustrating that, for some reasons, the person in front of me can't understand me or keeps trying to label me as being dramatic and all sorts of other comments. I don't blame their lack of knowledge that meltdown is a thing. But it's frustrating. The kind of emotion one experiences because they feel out of control and unable to do anything.

And for this sake, I have never had the desire for revenge, or even if someone disappoints me, it is a tingly feeling of annoyance, displeasure, or something like that. If that was an argument, I would just be baffled at how much they don't make sense, which might just turn back to frustration where I can't handle the fact that I'm not being understood right. Not because I want to be right, but because others would think that I'm being a dramatic kid otherwise and dismiss me entirely. 

I always say that a person should not take revenge; it's only a vicious cycle that has fed into wars and conflicts since the dawn of humanity. Anger, jealousy, entitlement, egotism—those hateful feelings feed into the ever-moving wheels of fighting and hurting each other. But I'm being an exception here, since I can't relate to feelings that drive people toward such actions. Who am I to speak about peace when I don't even know how others actually feel? But regardless, I think peace is an objectively good thing.

# Conclusion
Perhaps it's harder for others to control anger and all, since they actually feel it. For someone who is as chill as I am, I simply can't relate. It's easy for me to forgive and forget, and to let things go. I simply do not remember. But if someone has tried to control themselves in their anger, to practice temperance, that would be good. Even I have to try in a meltdown.
