---
layout: post
title: "(WIP) This World is a Contradiction"
category: discussion
---

Contradictions, I dare say, are the hallmark of absurdism. Yet that is not the reason this discussion came to life. However, it is truly odd that we never thought much of the contradictory nature of everything around us, and thus the absurdity of the world.

# A. The Contradiction of Truth, of the Universe
First, if attention may be brought to this statement by Aristotle, as quoted by Albert Camus in his essay The Myth of Sisyphus:
> The often ridiculed consequence of these opinions is that they destroy themselves. For by asserting that all is true we assert the truth of the contrary assertion and consequently the falsity of our own thesis (for the contrary assertion does not admit that it can be true). And if one says that all is false, that assertion is itself false. If we declare that solely the assertion opposed to ours is false or else that solely ours is not false, we are nevertheless forced to admit an infinite number of true or false judgments. For the one who expresses a true assertion proclaims simultaneously that it is true, and so on ad infinitum.

This statement simply brought forth the contradiction of (philosophical) truth itself. In asserting that something is true, we are also obligated by our own logic to assert of the falsity of something else. Furthermore, we are also obligated to prove of the truth beyond our assertion that nonetheless derived from it. If one is to take the meaning of understanding to be one of unification (as Albert Camus understood it), or in my own words, to understand is to reconcile concepts in a harmonic manner, then the world is incomprehensible. The world is at odds with itself and yet its puzzle pieces nevertheless fit perfectly together that the cogs are still running. This contradiction, by itself, is the proof of further contradictions born from it. One may admit that the truly absurd matter is the fact that our mind cannot understand, that in out own comprehension we are already absurd. Then, is the fact that we are using such an imperfect mind to solve a problem not absurd in itself, knowing that even a perfect premise but with an imperfect tool yield naught but falsehood?

Oddly, 8 billion members of humanity, regardless of whether they realise of this, are still living amidst this chaos. This is tantamount to saying that nobody noticed the elephant in the room; even when such a recognizable matter is clearly visible. Those who saw of it, would it be possible to not fall into a philosophical dilemma and instead moving on with life without batting an eye? If humanity seeks to understand, then there is no reason for such a problem to not be given attention. The fact that there exists no equation of physics that explain everything in the universe already showed how much of a patchwork this world looks like to us. Perhaps one may consider the complete solution of the universe to be a piecewise function, it is nevertheless the probable truth that all we ever did was finding the closest approximation to the equation of the world. Did we ever come close? One is right until proven wrong, even if what used to be the truth was backed by false empirical evidence. Perhaps it is us that must accept of the fragmented nature of the universe, that it is merely pieces of fabric clumsily patched together?

Even concepts that are opposite from each other still belong to each other. What a contradiction this too is! This must be the results of the innumerable characteristics that are present in each and every concept, tangible or intangible. Is it even possible for anything to not have a similarity to each other, and is it even possible for anything to NOT contradict each other? Even if we compare an object with itself, it too is contradicting its own essence. Once realised, one will always forever remain conscious of that truth. I dare say this too produce great psychological tension. And that is the nature of the absurd, for the absurd cannot sustain its existence without being contemplated, and consequentially, constantly be revolted against in our futile attemp to seek a reconciliation.

Shades of black and white are both opposte of each other, yet they are similar in that they are both shades. Heaven and hell is on the complete opposite spectrums, yet their similarity lies incthe existence of both. Undeniably, a concept manifest and exist the moments the mind think of it. All matters and concepts of the universe are interconnected by the bare minimum of their own existence. The fact that they exist already render the hypothesis "There exist one thing that is completely opposite of another thing" false. Because first and foremost, something must exist in order to be compared. And because of its own existence, the hypothesis collapsed on itself. Even if we are to ignore the common characteristic of existence in all concepts, undoubtedly we can all point out some similarity between what can be completely unrelated concept. The star in the distance and a milkshake, they are both made of atoms.

Must I say more of how absurd the world is? If even contradictions can have a friend in their own contradictory nature, then truly any contradictions have negated and contradicted themselves. Just like Aristotle had implied, the assertion of any truth leads to the assertion of any derived falsehood, and in doing so the truth has negated itself.

And yet, it is not the world that is absurd. It is the irrationality of human thoughts that is absurd. Truth brings about paradoxes, and paradoxes in turn negate the truth from which it came from. Of course, I'm also risking the possibility of some forms of well-formed truth that is complete and perfect, to the point no paradoxes can happen.

# B. The Contradiction that is Ourselves
Admittedly, the contradiction of truth renders all of our judgements inconsequential to the bigger picture. If falsehood is to be discarded, then no concepts, morality, or standards would remain. Each of us seeks for that which is convenient to us. At times one eill realise how much of a walking contradiction each of us is. Surely knowing of such matters must bring unease to our hearts, for we love what we can understand and dislike that which we can't. However this is in no way a negation to the humanity's passion in confronting what we can't understand in an attempt to solve the bigger puzzle, and are visible to a certain extent. The mind is wonderful in terms of its ability to reconcile itself. Because to seek for understanding is to seek for connections also. If I may add, even contradictory concepts are similar because of the fact that they both contradict themselves.

In saving someone we turn our back against others. In upholding absolute, universal justice, one risks becoming a dictator. Even in my own short life on this planet, everyone around me present many contradictions in themselves that might just make my head explode. The most loving person I know of is most susceptible to the feelings of betrayal, and in doing so such a person can easily become full of hatred, not even believing in her own goodness. The most caring person I know of realised everything is too overwhelming, and thus decided to care for themselves as a priority, not that this is not justified. Someone who seemed calm and had things managable turned out to have so much turbulence underneath. And myself who could never understood or relate to others emotions, or even care, would now seek for others' happiness (partly because I can make myself happy that I now hope to make others happy). Someone who told me that my mistakes, which were never as bad as committing crimes, are the same as murdering someone and saying a late apology; that same person inflicted both mental and physical harm on those closest to me. One truly become a contradiction of one own words.

On another note, I grew up in a pretty odd family too as a tiny kid. We did not have issues expressing affection, but when we are apart it simply become a matter of "out of sight, out of mind". We are aware of each other's existence, and none of us pushed or complained about whether or not enough hugs or kisses were given in the day. As natural as it was, I grew up without knowing how one is supposed to express affection to family members, which did eventually cause unprecendented misunderstanding. Certain people around me condemned me for seemingly too emotionless and uncaring, and at the time I thought that the way I was raised was not right. But in the end that kind of background became one of the greatest gift I had been given in my life. Precisely because of it that I have never been able to go out of control, and remain objective all the way through. I dare say that it is also in my nature that I grew up a bit more inquisitive. One never know something might be a blessing in disguise.

# C. The Contradiction Inherent in Our Perceptions
The components of the world are interconnected. Unironically, even though we have substance, 99% of atoms is a vacuum. The universe that seemingly look like a void full of nothingness is everything that we can ever have from this physical universe. And all that we have, really are nothing beyond our observable universe. Meaningless and insignificant to whatever that is out there. And yet, we pay no heed to the elephant in the room and move on with our life. I am not unfamiliar with those who seek to attach meaning to whatever they do, from who they are, their beings and essences. This is not excluding myself as well, as I believe humanity always unconsciously attach meaning to make senses of their surroundings. Just how many times have we uttered "Then what have I been doing all this for?" We place value in our time, too.

At the same time, we reject the meaninglessness, or perhaps a large number of us do. I have heard of many comments such as "What you are doing is meaningless", "What is the meaning of such people?", "Why do we need this, or why do we even need them?". What remains interesting is not the fact that we, indeed, are meaningless creatures on this Earth, but the fact that our attitudes toward the meaningless is so contradictory. There seems to he a defauly association that we would only need meaningful things, and any meaninglessness should be discarded. Which is to say, we have made ourselves dependent on the concepts of meanings, for without which it seems that one can't go on. If one were to fully reject meaninglessness in this manner, it is akin to rejecting oneself altogether. If a person realises this, would they not have committed suicide, for their lies no more meaning in their existence?

To ask for the meaning of something implies that we ourselves cannot find meaning in that particular matter, to the point that we must seek it from someone else. Here I may say that the concept of meaning is probably born from how something associates or matter to us. If it matters to us, it means something to us. If it is relevant to our values, we would not like it destroyed. Then, why is it that we impose what is meaningful and what is not on others? Must we destroy what we seem as meaningless even if there are the possibilities that they may mean something to others? In fact, I have never been able to understand why the meaninglessness is treated with such disdain; the concept itself is foreign to me.

Because meaning is something that we attach, it is inherent that we can create meanings for ourselves. Why should we not create meaning from things that are meaningless? Because in our nature, that is exactly what we have been doing for ourselves - giving ourselves values and purposes even when our existence means nothing to the unfeeling universe out there. I dare say, that it is precisely because we are nothing, that we can become anything. This is a paraphrase of a quote from an anime I used to watch, since credits should be given when they are due. Nothingness gives us liberty amd freedom, but not abandonment, for we are not obligated or tied to anything. We can choose our own ties. To the religious, God is with them. But nothingness is our everything, and because of this that we truly belong in the universe. Embracing that fact has never been about alienation, for it is not only ourselves but everything else that lack intrinsic meaning. Through this we are of common interest, where we seek to make something out of the seemingly nothingness that has been given to us. And yet, it is only nothingness because we have yet to laid our hands on it. Once touched, it becomes our everything. Humanity is amazing in the way that everywhere they go, they bring something with them. 

And I believe that such is the essence of the absurdists. 

There is no need to shy away from the meaningless, the nothingness. Because from it, we can create anything and become anything. Meaninglessness is only a matter of perspective. Then, if we can embrace all that exist, we truly do hsve everything. Because even if God created everything, just what is a God to a non-believer? Meaning does not comes from God, as blasphemous and wrong I might be. Meaning comes from humanity's acceptance of what they have. Then, even the meaninglessness would be able to bring us immense joy.

